Add gateway authentication how-to guides (#29)
datum-cloud/docs: content/en/docs/get-started/datum-concepts.md

Reviewer: Styling request - We don't have a linter for this yet, but could we keep line length at 80 characters to help with reviewing content? It'd allow for more targeted comments and recommended changes.

If helpful, I use the [Rewrap](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=stkb.rewrap) plugin in VSCode to help me with this - it allows me to select a block of text and wrap it at an arbitrary length. Another helpful plugin to use is the [Markdown All in One](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=yzhang.markdown-all-in-one) plugin package.

---
title: "Key Concepts for Using Datum"
linkTitle: "Key Concepts for Using Datum"
weight: 100
description: >-
     This page describes key concepts for working with the Datum Cloud.
---

> ## The Datum Operator

Reviewer: We should refer to this component as the "Datum Control Plane", which is a collection of operators. Some information covering this topic is available in the readme of the [datum](https://github.com/datum-cloud/datum?tab=readme-ov-file#datum) repo.

```suggestion
## The Datum Control Plane
```

The Datum Operator is implemented upon Kubernetes Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) to provide abstracted, yet orchestrated, functionality across Hyperscale Cloud Providers, Network as a Service Operators, Edge Clouds (including our own), and infrastructure under your management and control.

> By implementing an operator based on top of Kubernetes CRDs, we leverage common patterns familiar to developers, SREs, and Platform Engineers. Using the Datum Operator, you describe your desired system state through manifests, and the Datum Operator will deploy and continuously validate global operataional state against that manifest.

Reviewer: Typo in `operataional`.

Reviewer 2: TY. Fixed.

> Datum (will) supports bi-directional control plane federation, from the Datum Cloud to 1st or 3rd party compute platforms so that you can bring Datum anywhere you need it. At this point in time, Datum supports compute resources backed by GCP and network resrouces from our own Edge Cloud.

Reviewer: Typo in `resrouces`.

Reviewer 2: TY. Fixed.

## Helpful Tools

> ### Datum Portal - cloud.datum.net
> 
> The Datum Portal provides real-time insights on the state of your dedicated Datum Operator. 

Reviewer: A link to the portal would be helpful here. I'd also recommend removing the term "dedicated" here, as while a project control plane currently has dedicated API servers and operators attached to it, over time that will move toward a cell-based architecture with some shared resources. Also, today, there's a single "core" control plane where you manage your organization resources, such as projects.

```suggestion
### Datum Portal - cloud.datum.net

The [Datum Portal](https://cloud.datum.net) provides real-time insights on the state of your Datum Control Plane resources. 
```

### Datum's Command Line Tool - datumctl

> datumctl is our CLI for managing the Datum Operator via the command line. datumctl provides authorization, API management, and has the ability to manage .kubeconfig files so that one can leverage kubectl for day to day interaction with Datum Cloud.
> 

Reviewer: Could add a link to the tooling setup guide here.

```suggestion
[datumctl](https://docs.datum.net/docs/tasks/tools/#datumctl) is our CLI for managing the Datum Control Plane via the command line. datumctl provides authorization, API management, and has the ability to manage .kubeconfig files so that one can leverage kubectl for day to day interaction with Datum Cloud.

```

## Key Components

### Datum Workloads

> Datum Workloads are where the magic of Datum happens. Workloads are defined using Kubernetes Manifests. Workloads can be Virtual Machines or Containers, that are deployed as clusters across the Locations you define with "Superpowers" delivered through Datum Cloud Networks (more on both topics below). The Datum Operator is responsible for taking your workload manifest definition, and ensuring its running state across Locations and Networks.

Reviewer: Thoughts on avoiding the term "cluster" here?

```suggestion
Datum Workloads are where the magic of Datum happens. Workloads are defined using Kubernetes Manifests. Workloads can be Virtual Machines or Containers, that are deployed as collections of instances across the Locations you define with "Superpowers" delivered through Datum Cloud Networks (more on both topics below). The Datum Operator is responsible for taking your workload manifest definition, and ensuring its running state across Locations and Networks.
```
